"Pointing to the heaps of books and histories, we would guess on which line of which page in which chapter of which book a certain passage could be found. Success in guessing determined who got to drink tea first. Whenever I got it right, I would raise the teacup, laughing so hard that the tea would spill in my lap, and I would get up, not having been able to drink any of it at all." @ "LI QINGZHAO  "Epilogue to Records on Metal and Stone""
"“If I hear the city is in danger, what should I do?” He answered f rom afar, hands on his hips: “Follow the crowd. If you can’t do otherwise, abandon the household goods first, then the clothes, then the books and scrolls, then the old bronzes—but carry the sacrificial vessels for the ancestral temple yourself. Live or die with them; don’t give them up!” With that he galloped off on his horse." @ "LI QINGZHAO  "Epilogue to Records on Metal and Stone""
"Now seventy or eighty percent of that “solitary pile of leftovers” is gone. I still have a few volumes f rom three or four sets, none complete, and some very ordinary pieces of calligraphy, yet I treasure them as if I were protecting my own head—foolish person that I am!" @ "LI QINGZHAO  "Epilogue to Records on Metal and Stone""
"Kongzi was one who was born with moral understanding, while Mengzi was one who came to moral understanding through learning. People of later ages failed to understand this, saying sagehood requires one to be born with moral understanding and is not something one can attain through learning. As a result, the way of learning was lost. People came to devote themselves to extensive learning, forced memorization, clever writing, and elegant rhetoric, working to make their words elaborate and flowery. As a consequence, few have attained the Way" @ "CHENG YI"
"But after Mengzi passed away, the transmission ceased.... From that time forth, [medieval] Confucians practiced memorizing and reciting texts, and writing ornate essays. The unorthodox teachings of the Daoists and the Buddhists seemed more “lofty” than the Great Learning, but they lacked substance" @ "ZHUXI "
"2. It is certain that everything in the world has a reason why it is as it is, and a standard to which it should conform. This is Li. " @ "ZHUXI "
"5. Someone asked, “You say that Li is something that people and other things equally receive f rom Heaven. But do even insentient objects have Li? _____ replied, “They certainly do have the Li. For example, a boat can only travel on water, and a cart can only travel on land.”" @ "ZHUXI "
"8. When people and things are created, Heaven endows them with Li, and it is always the same Li." @ "ZHUXI "
"12. The myriad things all have Li, and Li all comes f rom one source. However, the roles that they occupy are different, so the functions of Li are not one. As a ruler, one must be benevolent; as a minister, one must be reverent; as a child, one must be filial; as a father, one must be kind. Each thing fully has Li. And though each thing is different in its function, everything is a manifestation of the one Li." @ "ZHUXI "
"14. People and things have natures that are fundamentally the same; it is simply that their endowments of Qi differ. Li is like water. It never fails to be clear, but if you put it in a white bowl, it is all white; if you put it in a black bowl, it is all black." @ "ZHUXI "
"17. If we simply discuss it in terms of Qi, then people and things all are created by getting Qi. But if we discuss it in terms of refined and coarse, then people get Qi that is correct and penetrating, while things get Qi that is partial and constricted." @ "ZHUXI "
"17. Because things get Qi that is partial, Li is constricted in them and they lack knowledge.... Because people receive the most correct Qi, they are able to understand the overarching Li and have awareness.... Things receive the partial Qi, of Heaven and Earth.... There are some things that have knowledge, but they only understand one small path. For example, birds know to have filial piety, otters know to perform ritual sacrifices, dogs are able to guard palaces, and oxen are able to plough. People, in contrast, can have knowledge of and do anything." @ "ZHUXI "
"18. Those who are born knowing it have Qi that is purely clear and bright, without the least darkness or turbidity. Next are those who are just below being born knowing it: they can know after they have learned it, can reach it only after they have practiced it. Next after that are those whose endowment is partial and have some obscurations, so they must painfully make an effort.... But if they approach it without stopping, what they achieve will be identical with that of those born knowing it." @ "ZHUXI "
"19. Heaven is Li, the mandate is the nature, and the nature is Li." @ "ZHUXI "
"How long has the moon been up there? I ask blue Heaven, wine in hand. And I wonder, in those palaces in the sky, what year this evening is? I would ride the wind and go up there, but I fear those marble domes and onyx galleries are up so high I couldn’t bear the cold. I rise and dance, clear shadow capering— how could it compare to this world of men? Curving past crimson towers, then lower past grillwork doors, it shines upon the sleepless. It should not trouble me, but why, when people part, is it always full? For mortals there is grief and joy, coming together and going apart; the moon has bright and shadowed phases, wholeness and then something gone— things never stay at perfection. So I merely wish that we could live long to share across a thousand miles its lovely graces." @ "SU SHI "River Tune""
"Behind the embroidered curtains a lovely woman lies asleep, when the hound in the yard barks f rantically. And the maidservant says: “The master’s back.” He’s helped off his splendid steed, dead drunk. She comes f rom behind the screen, straightening hair like piles of cloud, and sheds tears of love as orioles sing. “You’ve been messing around with someone else!” He says, “I have not!” “It’s obvious you have betrayed me.”" @ "ANONYMOUS, to “Fisherman’s Lyrics”"
"Inside a curtain of crystal, on a pillow of lapis lazuli, warm incense coaxes a dream, bedspread embroidered with lovebirds: beside the river, willows like mist, wild geese flying and a sky of dying moonlight. Threads of lotus root,* fall colors pale, cloth figures cut unevenly.** two long tresses separated by scented red, and a jade hairpin in the wind." @ "WEN TINGYUN (d. 870), to “Boddhisattva Barbarian”"
"Only a moment, this season’s splendor, this body, a bounded thing; to part now as if it didn’t matter would easily break the heart; so don’t be hasty, refusing the party’s wine, the banquet’s song. Mountains and rivers fill our eyes, but care is wasted on distant things; and grief at spring passing, wind and rain that bring down flowers, it is better by far to take as your love the person before your eyes." @ "YAN SHU (991–1055), to “Washing Creek Sands”"
"On May 7 I ran into a rainstorm on the Sand Lake Road. The raincoats had all been sent on ahead, and the people traveling with me were all thrown into confusion. I didn’t even notice. Soon it cleared up, and I wrote this. Pay no heed to those sounds, piercing the woods, hitting leaves— why should it stop me whistling, chanting and walking slowly along? With my bamboo cane and straw sandals I move more f ree than on horse. Who’s af raid? Let my life be spent with a raincoat in the misty rain. A biting chill in the spring breeze blows me sober f rom wine. A bit cold, but the sunshine that sinks on the hilltop comes back to welcome me. Turn your head to where you just were, where the winds were howling, go back— on the one hand, there’s no storm; on the other, no clear skies." @ "SU SHI "Settling Wind and Waves""
"Searching and searching, seeking and seeking, so chill, so clear, dreary, and dismal, and forlorn. That time of year when it’s suddenly warm, then cold again, now it’s hardest of all to relax. Two or three cups of weak wine— how can they resist the biting wind that comes with evening? The wild geese pass by— that’s what hurts the most— and yet they’re old acquaintances. In piles chrysanthemums fill the ground, looking all wasted, damaged— who could pick them, as they are now? I stay by the window, how can I wait alone until blackness comes? The beech tree, on top of that the fine rain, on until dusk, the dripping drop after drop. In a situation like this how can that one word“sorrow” grasp it?" @ "LI QING ZHAO "Note after Note""
"[Female lead speaks:] How embarrassing! How will I be able to face the madam? [Crimson speaks:] What is there to be ashamed of in f ront of your mother? On that night, the moon had barely risen above the willow tops, But you had already made a tryst with your lover after dusk. I was so ashamed, I turned my head and bit my sleeve; But when I fixed my eyes And looked, I saw the tapering tips of your shoes. One was so unrestrained in passion, she couldn’t stop; One fucked away with moaning sounds. Ah, then why didn’t you suffer the tiniest bit of shame?" @ "WANG SHI FU "Story of the Western Wing""
"“Don’t try to fool me!” said Daiyu. “You would have done much better to let me look at it in the first place, instead of hiding it so guiltily.” “In your case, coz, I have nothing to be af raid of,” said Baoyu; “but if I do let you look, you must promise not to tell anyone. It’s marvelous stuff. Once you start reading it, you’ll even stop wanting to eat!” He handed the book [i.e. The Story of the Western Wing] to her, and Daiyu put down her things and looked. The more she read, the more she liked it, and before very long she had read several acts. She felt the power of the words and their lingering f ragrance. Long after she had finished reading, when she had laid down the book and was sitting there rapt and silent, the lines continued to ring on in her head." @ "CAO XUEQIN "Dream of the Red Lantern""
"Immediately, Tripitaka awoke to the truth. Turning quickly, he thanked his three disciples. Monkey said, “We two parties need not thank each other, for we are meant to support each other. We are indebted to our master for our liberation, through which we have found the gateway to the making of merit, and fortunately, we have achieved the right f ruit. Our master also has to rely on our protection so that he may be firm in keeping both law and faith to find the happy deliverance f rom this mortal stock.”" @ "WU CHENGEN "Journey to the West""
"[Monkey says:] “Old Master, you have quite forgotten again the Heart Sutra. You have forgotten the sentence about ‘no eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, or mind.’ Those of us monks who have left our own family should see no form with our eyes, should hear no sound with our ears, should smell no smell with our noses, should taste no taste with our tongues; our bodies should have no knowledge of heat or cold, and our minds should gather no vain thoughts. This is called the extermination of the Six Robbers.”" @ "WU CHENGEN "Journey to the West""
"Day and night Qian went ahead trying to investigate to the utmost the Li in the bamboos. He exhausted his mind and thoughts and on the third day he was tired out and took sick. At first I said that it was because his energy and strength were insufficient. Therefore I myself went to try to investigate to the utmost. From morning till night, I was unable to find the Li of the bamboos. On the seventh day I also became sick because I thought too hard. In consequence we sighed to each other and said that it was impossible to be a sage or a worthy, for we do not have the tremendous energy to investigate things that they have." @ "WANG YANGMING"
"It is only because people don’t understand that the ultimate good is within their own minds that they search for it on the outside. They mistakenly believe that each affair and every thing has its own fixed Pattern (Li), and so they search for the ultimate good within each affair and every thing. This is why they become preoccupied with disconnected f ragments and isolated shards" @ "WANG YANGMING"
"The ancients who wished to brighten bright virtue throughout the world, first ordered well their own states. Wishing to order well their states, they first regulated their families. Wishing to regulate their families, they first cultivated their selves. Wishing to cultivate their selves, they first rectified their minds. Wishing to rectify their minds, they first sought to be sincere in their thoughts. Wishing to be sincere in their thoughts, they first extended their knowledge. Such extension of knowledge lay in the investigation of things." @ "WANG YANGMING"
"While one can say that there is an ordering of first and last in this sequence of spiritual practice, the practice itself is a unified whole that cannot be divided into any ordering of first and last. [For instance,] what do we mean by “self ”? It is merely the way we refer to the physical operation of the mind." @ "WANG YANGMING"
"When [even petty people] see a child [about to] fall into a well, they cannot avoid having a mind of alarm and compassion for the child. This is because their benevolence forms one body with the child. This shows that the benevolence that forms one body [with Heaven, Earth, and the myriad creatures] is something that even the minds of petty people possess. Such a mind is rooted in the nature mandated by Heaven and is naturally luminous, shining, and not beclouded. This is why it is called, “bright virtue.”" @ "WANG YANGMING"
"It is only when I universally extend my benevolence that forms one body [with Heaven, Earth, and the myriad creatures] that my bright virtue will be bright in every respect. This is what it means to ‘brighten the bright virtue throughout the world.’ This is what it means to ‘regulate one’s family,’ to ‘put one’s state in order,’ and thus to bring peace to the world." @ "WANG YANGMING"
"Now the mind in its fundamental substance is human nature (xing 性). Since human nature is wholly good, the mind in its fundamental substance is wholly correct. Why, then, must one make an effort to “rectify” it? It is only when thoughts begin to stir that there is that which is not correct. And so, those who wish to rectify their minds must correct their thoughts. Whenever they have a good thought, they must really love it, ‘like loving a lovely sight.’ Whenever they have a bad thought, they must really hate it, ‘like hating a bad odor.’ Then all of their thoughts will be sincere and their minds rectified." @ "WANG YANGMING"
"To fully extend one’s knowledge is not like the ‘filling out’ of what one knows that [Zhu Xi] talks about. It is simply to extend fully the ‘pure knowing’ (liang zhi 良知) of my own mind. Whenever a thought or idea arises, on its own, my pure knowing knows. Is it good? Only my pure knowing knows. It has never had to rely on other people’s opinions." @ "WANG YANGMING"
"Now, does the desire to extend one’s pure knowing refer to something shadowy and vague? No! It requires one to always be working at some concrete task or affair. And so, extending one’s knowledge must lie in “rectifying one’s thoughts about things” (ge wu). Thoughts always arise in regard to some thing or affair. Thus one must correct whatever [in one’s thoughts] is not correct and return to what is correct." @ "WANG YANGMING"
"In the concluding remarks to his preface to the Story of the Western Wing (Xixiang ji), the Mountain Farmer of Dragon Cave [maybe Li Zhi’s own pen-name] stated: “I’ll be happy if worldly-wise people just don’t say that I still possess the mind of a child.” For what is a childlike mind? It is the genuine mind." @ "LI ZHI "On the Childlike Mind""
"The child’s mind (tongxin 童心) is the genuine mind. Free of all falsehood and entirely genuine, it is the fundamental mind at the very beginning of the first thought. Losing the child’s mind is losing the genuine mind." @ "LI ZHI "On the Childlike Mind""
"As one grows older, one hears and sees the Patterns of the Way (dao-li 道理). When one allows these to dominate what is within oneself, then the child’s mind is lost. As one grows older, the Patterns of the Way that one hears and sees grow more numerous with each day, thus extending the breadth of one’s knowledge. Thereupon, one realizes that one should covet a good reputation, and endeavor to enhance one’s reputation. One then loses one’s child-like mind." @ "LI ZHI "On the Childlike Mind""
"Now when your mind is overwritten by the Patterns of the Way, by what one has heard or seen, then your words will be the words of the Patterns of the Way; they will not be spontaneous words that come f rom the child-like mind. How could this lead to anything other than phony people speaking phony words, enacting phony actions, and producing phony writings?" @ "LI ZHI "On the Childlike Mind""
"Writing evolved through the ages and became the literature of the Six Dynasties, changed and became the poetry of the Tang. It changed again and developed into fantastic tales, changed yet again and became play-scripts like the Western Wing and the Water Margin, and now has become the eight-legged essay. All the most exquisite literature f rom the past through the present cannot be discussed in terms of the ages that preceded or followed them. Instead, it comes spontaneously f rom the child’s mind. Why speak of the Six Classics? Why speak of the Analects or the Mengzi?" @ "LI ZHI "On the Childlike Mind""
"The Six Classics, the Analects, and the Mengzi have become nothing more than a crib sheet for those belonging to the “Study of Principle” school (Lixue 理學), a fountainhead for phonies." @ "LI ZHI "On the Childlike Mind""
"____ said,“The trees of Ox Mountain were once beautiful. But because it bordered on a large state, hatchets and axes besieged it.... People seeing it barren, believed that there had never been any timber there. Could this be the nature of the mountain? “When we consider what is present in people, could they truly lack the hearts of benevolence and righteousness? That by which they discard their good heart is simply like the hatchets and axes in relation to the trees. With them besieging it day by day, can it remain beautiful?”" @ "MENGZI "Ox Mountain""
"Now, keeping in mind that the three-hundred verses of the Classic of Poetry begin with a song of courtship called “Osprey’s Cry,” I will begin my book with my marriage and proceed f rom there. I will do my best to record everything that I did and felt during those times...." @ "SHEN FU  "Six Records of a Life Adrift""
"“Why so unhappy?” I asked her. “Watching an opera performance is meant to be a way to relax, but today’s show is really quite heart-wrenching!” Yun replied. Both Yu and Wang laughed at her. “It’s because she feels things so deeply,” I explained to them." @ "SHEN FU  "Six Records of a Life Adrift""
"[Shen Fu:] “But respect lies within one’s heart, not in empty formalities.” [Chen Yun:] “No one is more dear to us than our parents; could we actually respect them in our hearts alone while being reckless in our actions and words?” I took her in my arms and after I comforted her she relaxed and began to smile. From that moment on the expressions “May I?” and “Thank you” became part of our daily conversation. We were to live together as a devoted husband and wife for three and twenty years, and our feelings for one another grew more intimate with each passing year" @ "SHEN FU  "Six Records of a Life Adrift""
"So we did as she suggested and piled up the stones into a miniature mountain.... When you let your spirit wander among the flowers, it was as though you were visiting the enchanted isle of Penglai. We placed the basin outside under the eaves, where Yun and I could appreciate and comment on various spots: here we would build a waterside pavilion; here was perfect for a thatched gazebo; here we could make our home; here we could fish; and f rom here we could survey it all. We harbored these mountains and ravines in our hearts as though we might actually be able to move there one day" @ "SHEN FU  "Six Records of a Life Adrift""
"But one night a pair of worthless cats slipped f rom the eaves while fighting over some food and smashed the basin and stand to pieces in the blink of an eye. I sighed and said to Yun, “Even this small effort of ours has made the Fashioner of Things jealous!” The two of us could not hold back our tears." @ "SHEN FU  "Six Records of a Life Adrift""
"I have some advice for the husbands and wives of this world: while you must not hate one another, nor should you love one another too much. They say that “a loving couple never makes it to the end”; the path I took could certainly serve as a lesson to others." @ "SHEN FU  "Six Records of a Life Adrift""
"I was born during a time of great peace and prosperity into a scholarly family living by the Pavilion of Azure Waves in the city of Suzhou, so one might say that Heaven has been very generous to me" @ "SHEN FU  "Six Records of a Life Adrift""
"When it comes to a poor scholar’s daily clothing, food, tableware, and lodgings, they should be spare, elegant, and immaculate. The way to be sparing is to make do with what you have. Yun once fashioned a plum blossom platter by using six white porcelain plates.... When you set down this special platter, it looked just as though a plum blossom f rom an ink painting had been turned over on the table. Then when you lifted the lid to look inside, it was as though the food were resting on flower petals" @ "SHEN FU  "Six Records of a Life Adrift""
"When you adorn your bonsai with stones and flowers, you can fashion miniature scenes to lose yourself in and expansive scenes to strike wonder in you. Then when you enjoy a cup of f resh tea in your secluded studio, you can be amused by letting your spirit wander f reely in the scenery before you." @ "SHEN FU  "Six Records of a Life Adrift""
"A communication: Magnificently our great emperor soothes and pacifies China and the foreign countries, regarding all with the same kindness. If there is profit, then he shares it with the peoples of the world; if there is harm, then he removes it on behalf of the world. This is because he takes the mind of Heaven-and-earth as his mind." @ "LIN ZEXU  "Letter to Queen Victoria"
"Our Celestial Dynasty rules over and supervises the myriad states. Yet the emperor cannot bear to execute people without having first tried to reform them by instruction. May you, O Prince, check your wicked and sift out your vicious people before they come to China, in order to guarantee the peace of your nation, to show further the sincerity of your politeness and submissiveness, and to let the two countries enjoy together the blessings of peace. After receiving this dispatch you will immediately reply regarding the details of your cutting off the opium traffic." @ "LIN ZEXU  "Letter to Queen Victoria"
"Chinese principles and institutions were all laid down by Confucius. His disciples received his teachings and transmitted them so that they were carried out in the country and used to change the old customs. Scholars once knew the Six Classics were written by Confucius; this was the opinion of all before the Han dynasty. Only when a scholar recognizes that the Six Classics were written by Confucius can he understand why Confucius was the great sage, the founder of the doctrine, and the model for all ages; and why he alone was called the supreme master." @ "KANG YOUWEI"
"When Confucius prepared the Spring and Autumn Annals, he extended it to embrace the Three Ages. Thus, during the Age of Disorder he considers his own state as the center, treating all other Chinese feudal states as on the outside. In the Age of Order he considers China as the center, while treating the outlying barbarian tribes as on the outside. And in the Age of Great Peace he considers everything, far or near, large or small, as if it were one.... The present-time, for example, is the Age of Order. It is therefore necessary to propagate the doctrines of self-rule and independence, and to discuss publicly the matter of constitutional government. If the laws are not reformed, great disorder will result." @ "KANG YOUWEI"
"Confucius was born in the Age of Disorder. Now that communications extend through the great earth and changes have taken place in Europe and America, the world is evolving toward the Age of Order. There will be a day when everything throughout the earth, large or small, far or near, will be like one. There will no longer be any nations, no more racial distinctions, and customs will be everywhere the same. With this uniformity will come the Age of Great Peace. Confucius knew all this in advance." @ "KANG YOUWEI"
"I seemed to remember, though not too clearly, that f rom ancient times on people have often been eaten, and so I started leafing through a history book to look it up. There were no dates in this history, but scrawled this way and that across every page were the words BENEVOLENCE, RIGHTEOUSNESS, and MORALITY. Since I couldn’t get to sleep anyway, I read that history very carefully for most of the night, and finally I began to make out what was written between the lines; the whole volume was filled with a single phrase: EAT PEOPLE!" @ "LU XUN  "Diary of a Madman""
"Maybe there are some children around who still haven’t eaten human flesh. Save the children...." @ "LU XUN  "Diary of a Madman""
"In addition to the limitations of social status and economic means, our Chinese characters present another high threshold to the masses: their difficulty. If you don’t spend ten or so years on them, it’s not easy to cross this threshold. Those who cross over it are the scholar-officials, and these same scholar-officials do their utmost to make writing as difficult as possible because it makes them especially dignified. The Americans say, “Time is money.” But I think that time is life. To squander other people’s time for no reason is, in fact, no different than robbing and murdering them" @ "LU XUN  "An Outsider  Chat about Written Language""
"The ancients handed down writing to us. Admittedly, this is a tremendous heritage for which we should be thankful. However, at the present time, when pictographs no longer resemble the objects they are supposed to represent, and when symphonetic graphs have gotten out of tune, our thanks cannot but be a bit hesitant. If we want Chinese culture to advance as one, we must promote the language of the masses and the literature of the masses. All the more, our writing must be Latinized." @ "LU XUN  "An Outsider  Chat about Written Language""
"A kingdom smashed, its hills and rivers still here, spring in the city, plants and trees grow deep. Moved by the moment, flowers splash tears, alarmed at parting, birds startle the heart. War’s beacon fires have gone on three months, letters f rom home are worth thousands in gold. Fingers run through white hair until it thins, cap-pins will almost no longer hold" @ "DU FU "A View in Spring""
"Here among flowers one flask of wine, with no close f riends, I pour it alone. I lift cup to bright moon, beg its company, then facing my shadow, we become three. The moon has never known how to drink; my shadow does nothing but follow me. ... Yet when I sing, the moon goes back and forth; I dance, and my shadow dances wildly. When still sober we share f riendship and pleasure, then, utterly drunk, each goes his own way— Let us join to roam beyond human cares and plan to meet far off in the river of stars." @ "LI BAI "Drinking Alone at Midnight""
"When the monk heard that the master and his disciple had both died, he went to the god’s abode. At nightfall he began reciting the Diamond Sutra in the temple. Come midnight there was heard an extremely loud rushing of wind, and then in a flash a creature appeared: its form was huge and f rightening, truly strange and awful. ... When the god saw him sitting there, it took on all sorts of fearsome shapes. But then it came directly before the master, bent its right knee to the ground, joined its palms, and listened reverently until the recitation was complete." @ ""Records of the Strange""
"Ziying Chun was a native of Shuxiang. He was a skilled diver. He once caught a red carp. Enamored of its color, he took it home and raised it in a pond, regularly feeding it rice and other grains. After a year it had grown to be over eight feet long. Then it grew horns and wings. At this, Ziying became f rightened. He made obeisance and apologized to the creature. But the fish said, “I have come to welcome you. Climb on my back and we will ascend together.”" @ ""Records of the Strange""
"After dousing the light, he recited the Odes, Documents, and others of the Five Classics and then lay down.... In the darkness a strange creature made its way stealthily toward him, then suddenly leaped on top of him. Boyi jumped up. He used his sleeves to trap the sprite and his sash to tie it up. Calling for a torch, he shone light on the creature and saw that he had captured an old fox." @ ""Records of the Strange""
"As Mulian viewed the world of transmigration with his supernatural eyes, he discovered that his deceased mother had been reborn in the realm of hungry ghosts, and as there was nothing to eat there she had wasted away to skin and bones. Stricken with grief, Mulian filled a bowl with rice and approached his mother to offer it. His mother held the bowl in her left hand and took some rice with her right hand, but before the rice reached her mouth it turned into a piece of burning charcoal, and she could not eat it at all. Crying loudly in anguish, Mulian hurriedly returned to the presence of the Buddha." @ ""Yulanpen Sutra/Mulian Rescues his Mother""
"If by chance in the goodness of your heart you would condescend to fulfill my secret hope, then even if it were on the day of my death, it would be for me like being reborn. But, perchance, the successful scholar holds love to be but of little account, considering his previous mating to have been a vile action, his having taken enforced vows as something one may well betray. If this be so, then my form will melt away and my bones will dissolve, yet my glowing faith will not perish.... Please, please take care of yourself." @ "YUAN ZHEN  "Ying Ying  Story""
"People at the time generally accepted that Zhang was someone who knew how to amend his errors. At parties, I have often brought up this notion. One would have those who know not do such things, but those that have done such things should not become carried away by them." @ "YUAN ZHEN  "Ying Ying  Story""
"Form is empty; emptiness is form.... Therefore, Shariputra, in emptiness there is no form, no feeling, no discrimination, no consciousness, ... no ignorance, no extinction of ignorance, no aging and death, and no extinction of aging and death. In the same way, there is no suffering, origin, cessation, path; no wisdom, no attainment, no non-attainment." @ ""Heart Sutra""
"As guardians of the text, ten Jade Maidens were commanded to remain by it. Ten Jade Lads were commanded to guard the Annals of the Sage Lord. These spirits are also to oversee those Daoists who come into possession of the texts, reporting their merits and transgressions to masters who have gone before and who now reside in mystery in Upper Clarity. One should not carelessly speak of its contents to any of those to whom the text is not to be transmitted. Even uttering the names of the sections of this text is a violation of the regulations forbidding the disclosure of celestial writ." @ ""Purple Texts""
"Envisioning them, call your three cloudsouls by name—Bright Spirit, Embryo Light, and Tenebrous Essence—telling these three spirits to stay put. Cause the two green dragons to position themselves in your eyes and the two white tigers to place themselves within your nostrils. The vermilion sparrow should be above your heart, facing your mouth. The gray-green tortoise should be below your left foot and the numinous snake below your right foot. Within your two ears will be Jade Maidens, dressed in dark brocade and blocking the ear canals." @ ""Purple Texts""
"Dig a pit, seven feet square and seven feet deep. Then take the Elixir of Langgan Efflorescence, mixed with the egg-shaped Essences of the Swirling Solution, and plant these in the pit. In three years’ time a plant will grow like a calabash, with seed like five-colored peaches. If you eat this f ruit you will rise above to the Grand Bourne. When you spit on the ground, your saliva will turn into cock and hen phoenixes. You may mount these to soar up." @ ""Purple Texts""
"He drove an ivory car with winged dragons, heaving and slithering, teamed scarlet serpents and blue basilisks, wriggling and writhing. Up and downward flexed straining straightened necks, they bounded flaunting, spiralling humped bristling loping legs bent under, and arced away swaying." @ "SIMA XIANGRU "The Great Man""
""You truly are a Qin man! You boast and brag of lodges and chambers, and you depend upon rivers and mountains for security. You truly are knowledgeable about King Zhaoxiang [of Qin] and informed about the [Qin] First Emperor. But what insight have you shown into the words and the deeds of the great Han?”" @ "BAN GU "Two Capitals Rhapsody""
"Emperor Guangwu recreated anew the relation of husband and wife and there was now distinction between father and son. The positions of ruler and subject were now established, and the system of human relations began.... With the Six Classics as his reference, he reflected on virtue; He scrutinized the ancient past and discussed meritorious deeds. His feats of benevolence and sageness were complete, and the way of emperors and kings was perfected." @ "BAN GU "Two Capitals Rhapsody""
"Blowing fur and feathers, raining blood, Sprinkle the moor, blot out the sky, And the level plain is stained incarnadine. Pines and cypresses fall to the ground; Groves and forests are smashed.... No plants and trees are left, And all birds and beasts are slain. Flying creatures have no time to soar away; Running beasts have no time to flee. As sudden as a gesture or a glance, The game carts are full. They enjoy themselves, but not to extremes; They kill, but do not destroy everything in sight." @ "BAN GU "Two Capitals Rhapsody""
"Keep on going, on and on, parted f rom you while alive. Ten thousand miles apart and more, each of us at a corner of sky. The road between is blocked and long, will we ever meet face to face again?" @ ""Nineteen Old Poems""
"Cypress on grave mound, green so green, and in the ravine, rocks heaped in piles. Man is born between earth and sky; he goes swift as a wayfarer traveling far. So take your joy in beakers of ale, pour it full, not stingily; Drive the cart harder, lash on the nag, in Luoyang and Wan good times are had. ... So feast to the end, give the heart glee, why let grim woes beset you?" @ "BAN GU "Two Capitals Rhapsody""
"On a day of good luck, at the well-favored hour with due awe we delight the Sovereign on High. ... We proffer cinammon wine and peppered beers, raise up the drumstick, strike now the drums, ... The holy ones sway, gorgeous their gowns, and our Lord is much pleased, hale in his joy." @ "QU YUAN "Songs of the Southlands""
"High off we fly, steadily soaring, riding pure vapors, He drives Shadow and Light; then I and my Lord, dashing swiftly ahead, lead on the High God down to Nine Hills." @ "QU YUAN "Songs of the Southlands""
"The hall is filled with fair women; at once with me only His eyes meet and fix. He comes without speaking, without farewell, goes; He rides on the whirlwind, bears banners of cloud. No grief is so great as parting while living, for there’s no joy so strong as love newly found." @ "QU YUAN "Songs of the Southlands""
"I send my soul flying, still it can’t reach her; the woman so lovely for me heaves a sigh; my tears now flow f reely, trickling down, and I long for the Lady, I am tormented." @ "QU YUAN "Songs of the Southlands""
"The men in power with their petty envies cannot recognize my worth. I could bear high office and bring glory to the world, yet I am plunged to the depths and deprived of success." @ "QU YUAN "Songs of the Southlands""
"“Replicas of palaces, scenic towers, and the hundred officials, as well as rare utensils and wonderful objects, were brought to fill up the tomb. Craftsmen were ordered to set up crossbows and arrows, rigged so they would immediately shoot anyone attempting to break in. Mercury was used to fashion imitations of the hundred rivers, the Yellow River and the Yangtze, and the seas, constructed in such a way that they seemed to flow. Above were representations of all the heavenly bodies, below, the features of the earth.”" @ "SIMA QIAN "
"There are things worth noting even in the shifts of power of the Warring States period. Why must one learn only f rom high antiquity? Qin’s seizure of the empire was accompanied by much violence, yet it managed to change with the times and its accomplishments were great.... Other scholars see that the Qin occupied the position of emperor for only a short period, hence they refer to the Qin only as an object of ridicule and decline to say anything more about it. This is as ridiculous as trying to eat with one’s ear, and lamentable indeed." @ "SIMA QIAN "
"The draft version was not yet completed when this misfortune happened to me; I could not bear that it not be completed, so I submitted to the most extreme punishment without showing my ire. When I have actually completed this book, I will have it stored away on some famous mountain, left for someone who will carry it through all the cities. Then I will have made up for the blame that I earlier incurred by submitting to dishonor." @ "SIMA QIAN "
"“I transmit rather than innovate. I trust in and have a love for antiquity.”" @ "CONFUCIUS"
"If a family of the common people had more than two sons but failed to establish a separate household, its taxes were to be doubled. Those producing large amounts of grain and cloth were to be excused from corvée labor, while those who engaged in secondary occupations for profit, or who became poor out of laziness, were rounded up and made government slaves. The people were to be grouped in units of five and ten households, exercising mutual surveillance and mutually responsible before the law." @ "SHANG YANG"
"Believing that public and private interests are the same is the kind of disaster that comes from not being discerning. When planning for the good of individuals, nothing is better than to cultivate benevolence and righteousness and practice the arts of culture.... But if [these virtues become public values], people without accomplishment would receive employment in the government and people without noble titles would become eminent and honored. Therefore, in the state of an enlightened ruler there are no texts written on bamboo strips, the law provides the only education; there are no words of learned masters, the civil officers are the only teachers." @ "HAN FEI"
"If in a hundred generations there is not a single arrow shaft that is naturally straight, or a single piece of wood that is naturally round, how is it that every generation is able to ride around in chariots and shoot down birds with arrows? It is because they use the way of straightening and bending. Even if there are a few people who are naturally good without having been trained through rewards and penalties, an enlightened ruler will not value them.... A ruler who has the proper method does not rely on accidental goodness." @ "HAN FEI"
"[In great antiquity,] there appeared a sage who taught the people how to build nests out of wood so they could escape all harm. The people were pleased by this and made the man king of the entire world, giving him the name “The Nester.” Now if someone built nests out of wood during the age of the Xia Dynasty, they would surely be laughed at by Gun and Yu.... This being the case, if someone goes around praising the Way of Yao, Shun, Tang, Wu, and Yu in the present age, they will surely be laughed at by the new sages." @ "HAN FEI"
"If you wait for people to be good, you will find that there are no more than ten good people within the borders of your state. But if you create a situation in which people find it impossible to do wrong, the entire state can be brought into compliance. So if one insists on employing only officers who are virtuous and honest, there will not be enough men to fill the offices of the state.... Instead, the way of an enlightened ruler is to unify the laws and not seek after wisdom, to establish the proper methods and not yearn for honesty." @ "HAN FEI"
"Marquis Zhao of Han once became drunk and fell asleep. The Steward of Caps, seeing that his ruler was cold, placed the Marquis’ cloak over him. Consequently, the ruler punished both the Steward of Caps and the Steward of Cloaks. He punished the Steward of Cloaks because the man had failed his appointed task, and he punished the Steward of Caps because the man had overstepped the bounds of his position. The harm that comes from ministers encroaching on each other’s office is greater than the harm of being cold." @ "HAN FEI"
"A ruler should never reveal what he desires. For if he reveals what he desires, the ministers will cut and polish themselves accordingly. Thus, an enlightened ruler has wisdom, but he does not use it to make plans. He allows the ten thousand things to know their place. He has worthiness, but he does not use it to conduct his own affairs. He observes what his ministers and subordinates base their actions on. He has courage, but he does not use it to express anger. He allows the assembled ministers to fully extend their martial feelings.... When an enlightened ruler practices nonaction above, the assembled ministers will be anxious and fearful below." @ "HAN FEI"
"Not honoring the virtuous leads the people to avoid contention. Not valuing precious goods leads them to not steal. Not displaying the desirable leads their hearts away f rom chaos. This is why sages bring things to order by emptying people’s minds and filling their bellies. They weaken the people’s commitments and strengthen their bones; They make sure that the people are without knowledge or desires, And that those with knowledge do not dare to act. Sages enact nonaction and everything becomes well ordered." @ "LAOZI"
"When the great Way is abandoned, there are benevolence and righteousness. When wisdom and intelligence come forth, there is great hypocrisy. When the six familial relationships are out of balance, there are kind parents and filial children. When the state is in turmoil and chaos, there are loyal ministers" @ "LAOZI"
"If you make your blade too keen it will not hold its edge. ... A weapon that is too strong will not prove victorious; A tree that is too strong will break. ... In all the world, nothing is more supple or weak than water; Yet nothing can surpass it for attacking what is stiff and strong." @ "LAOZI"
"Sages never work at great things and are therefore able to achieve greatness. ... Work at things before they come to be; Regulate things before they become disordered. A tree whose girth fills one’s embrace sprang f rom a downy sprout; A terrace nine stories high arose f rom a layer of dirt; A journey of a thousand leagues began with a single step. ... This is why sages practice nonaction and so do not fail; They do not lay hold and so do not lose." @ "LAOZI"
"The greatest of rulers is but a shadowy presence; Next is the ruler who is loved and praised; Next is the one who is feared; Next is the one who is reviled. ... [When it comes to the greatest rulers] When their task is done and work complete, Their people all say, “This is just how we are.”" @ "LAOZI"
"Without going out the door, one can know the whole world. Without looking out the window, one can see the Way of Heaven. ... Who knows why Heaven dislikes what it does? Even sages regard this as a difficult question. The Way does not contend but is good at victory" @ "LAOZI"
"In the northern darkness there is a fish called Kun. No one knows how many thousand miles around it is. He transforms himself into a bird named Peng. No one knows how many thousand miles across it is." @ "ZHUANGZI"
"In the northern darkness there is a fish called Kun. No one knows how many thousand miles around it is. He transforms himself into a bird named Peng. No one knows how many thousand miles across it is. The cicada and the student-dove laugh at the Peng bird, saying, “When we start up and fly, we struggle for the elm or the sandalwood. Sometimes we don’t even make it but just plunk to the ground. What is she doing rising ninety thousand miles and heading south?”" @ "ZHUANGZI"
"How is the Way obscured that there are true and false? How are words obscured that there are “right” and “wrong”? ... The Way is obscured by small completions. Words are obscured by glory and show. So we have the rights and wrongs of the Confucians and the Mohists. Each calls right what the other calls wrong and each calls wrong what the other calls right." @ "ZHUANGZI"
"A butcher was cutting up an ox for Lord Wenhui. Wherever his hand touched, wherever his shoulder leaned, wherever his foot stepped, wherever his knee pushed—with a zip! with a whoosh!—he handled his chopper with aplomb, and never skipped a beat. “What your servant values is the Way, which goes beyond technique. When I first began cutting up oxen, I did not see anything but oxen. Three years later, I couldn’t see the whole ox. And now, I encounter them with spirit and don’t look with my eyes. Sensible knowledge stops and spiritual desires proceed. I rely on the Heavenly patterns, strike in the big gaps, am guided by the large fissures, and follow what is inherently so. I never touch a ligament or tendon, much less do any heavy wrenching!”" @ "ZHUANGZI"
"They fly like an arrow f rom a bow— that’s the way they guard their rights and wrongs. They stick like they’d sworn an oath— that’s the way they hold to victory. They die like fall and winter— that describes their daily deterioration. They drown— and what makes it happen can’t bring them back. As the mind nears death, nothing can bring it back to vitality. Happiness, anger, despair, joy, planning, sighing, bending, f reezing, elegance, ease, candor, posturing– It’s music out of emptiness! Mist condensing into mushrooms!" @ "ZHUANGZI"
"_______ was angling by the Pu River when the king of Chu sent two officers to him, saying, “We would like to trouble you with administering Our kingdom.” Without looking up f rom his pole, _______ said, “I’ve heard Chu has a sacred turtle. It’s been dead three thousand years and the king keeps it wrapped and boxed and stored up in his ancestral hall. Now, would that turtle rather have its bones treasured in death, or be alive dragging its tail in the mud?”" @ "ZHUANGZI"
"Our teacher Mozi says, “The task of the good person is always to diligently promote the benefit of all-under-heaven and eliminate harm to all-under-heaven.... Does it benefit people? Then do it. Does it not benefit people? Then stop.”" @ "MOZI "Against Musical Performances""
"“Impartiality gives rise to all the great benefits in the world and partiality gives rise to all the great harms of the world. In order to be a superior person, one must regard the well-being of others as one regards one’s own well-being; one must regard the parents of others as one regards one’s own parents.”" @ "MOZI "Impartial Caring""
"“[When elaborate funerals are the norm,] the death of a common man exhausts the wealth of a family, and the death of a lord empties the state treasury, surrounding the body with gold, jade, and pearls, and filling the grave with carts and horses and bundles of silk.... Mourners have to live in a mourning hut, sleep on a coarse mat of straw, ... and all this is to last three years.... So, then, in elaborate funerals much wealth is buried, and in extended mourning abstention f rom work is prolonged.... The way to wealth is not here found.”" @ "MOZI "Simplicity in Funerals""
"___ said, “In past ages, there were those who did not bury their parents. When their parents died, they took them and abandoned them in a ditch. The next day they passed by them, and foxes were eating them, bugs were sucking on them. Sweat broke out on the survivors’ foreheads. They turned away and could not look. Now, it was not for the sake of others that they sweated. What was inside their hearts broke through to their countenances. So they went home and, returning with baskets and shovels, covered them.”" @ "MENGZI"
"“Suppose someone suddenly saw a child about to fall into a well: everyone in such a situation would have a feeling of alarm and compassion—not because one sought to get in good with the child’s parents, not because one wanted fame among their neighbors and f riends, and not because one would dislike the sound of the child’s cries. From this we can see that if one is without the heart of compassion, one is not a human.... And the heart of compassion is the sprout of benevolence.”" @ "MENGZI"
"____ said, “To fully apply one’s heart is to understand one’s nature. If one understands one’s nature, then one understands Heaven. To preserve one’s mind and nourish one’s nature is the means to serve Heaven.”" @ "MENGZI"
"“The activities of Heaven are constant.... If you respond to them with order, then you will have good fortune. If you respond to them with chaos, then you will have misfortune. If you strengthen the fundamental works and moderate expenditures, then Heaven cannot make you poor. If your means of nurture are prepared and your actions are timely, then Heaven cannot make you ill. If you cultivate the Way and do not deviate f rom it, then Heaven cannot ruin you.”" @ "XUNZI "
"“Human nature is bad. Goodness is a matter of deliberate effort. Now people’s nature is such that they are born with a fondness for their own benefit.... They are born with feelings of hate and dislike.... They are born with desires of the eyes and ears, and a fondness for beautiful sights and sounds.... Therefore they need to be changed by teachers and models and guided by ritual and righteousness, and only then will they achieve deference, culture, and order.”" @ "XUNZI "
"“If people’s nature is bad, then f rom what are ritual and righteousness produced? Ritual and righteousness are produced f rom the artifice of the sage; they are not produced f rom people’s nature. Thus, when the potter mixes up clay and makes vessels, the vessels are produced f rom the artifice of the craftsman; ... when the craftsman carves wood and makes utensils, the utensils are produced f rom the artifice of the craftsman.... The sage similarly accumulates reflections and thoughts and practices artifice in order to produce ritual and righteousness.”" @ "XUNZI "
"“Those who cross waters mark out the deep places, to make it so that people will not fall in. Those who order the people mark out what is chaotic, to make it so that people will not err. The rituals are their markers. The former kings used rituals to mark out what would make the whole world chaotic. Now if one discards the rituals, this is getting rid of the markers. And so, the people become lost and confused and fall into disasters and troubles. This is why punishments and penalties become profuse.”" @ "XUNZI "
"Zigong wanted to do away with the traditional practice of sacrificing a lamb to announce the beginning of the month. The Master said, “Zigong! You regret the loss of the lamb, whereas I would regret the loss of the ritual." @ "CONFUCIUS"
"Kongzi said of the Ji family*: “They have eight rows of dancers performing in their courtyard. If they can condone this, what are they not capable of ?”" @ "CONFUCIUS"
"If his mat was not straight, he would not sit on it." @ "CONFUCIUS"
"The Master said, “In singing the praises of li (ritual), how could I be referring merely to jade and silk offerings? In singing the praises of music, how could I be referring merely to bells and drums?”" @ "CONFUCIUS"
"Some people said of Kongzi, “Why is it that he is not participating in government?” Upon being informed of this, the Master remarked... “In being a filial son and good brother, one is already taking part in government. What need is there, then, to speak of ‘participating in government’?”" @ "CONFUCIUS"
"“Sacrifice as if present” [means]: sacrifice to the spirits as if the spirits were present. The Master said, “If I do not [personally] participate in the sacrifice, it is as though no sacrifice were made.”" @ "CONFUCIUS"
"The Master said, “At fifteen I set my heart on learning; at thirty I took my place in society; at forty I became free of doubts; at fifty I understood Heaven’s Mandate; at sixty my ear was attuned; at seventy I could follow my heart’s desires without overstepping the rule.”" @ "CONFUCIUS"
"Zixia asked about filial piety. The Master said, “It is what shows up on one’s face that is difficult. It is not necessarily filial to shoulder the troublesome affairs of one’s elders, or to give them precedence in wine and food.”" @ "CONFUCIUS"
"The Master said, “In a virtuous person’s view of world, there is nothing that is [always] suitable, and nothing that never is. They favor what is appropriate." @ "CONFUCIUS"
"“To my mind, nothing is [always] right, and nothing is [always] wrong.”" @ "CONFUCIUS"
"“If you guide them with government policies and keep them in line with punishments, the common people will seek for ways to get around your policies and will have no sense of shame. “If, however, you lead them with virtue and keep them in line with ritual, they will develop a sense of shame and furthermore reform themselves.”" @ "CONFUCIUS"
"King Wen said, Woe! Woe upon you, Yin-Shang! It is not Di* who caused this evil time, but Yin**, which does not act as it did of old. For even if you lack wise old men, still you have your ancient codes and laws. Yet you do not heed them, and so your Great Charge is overthrown" @ ""Classic of Poetry""
"The greater brightness was below, while fierceness was on high. One should not rely on Heaven: the kingship is not easy. Yin’s heir stood in Heaven’s place, yet it made him lose his lands around. ... This King Wen* of ours, (*King Wen was the ancestor of the Zhou) his prudent heart was well ordered. He shone in serving Di on high, and thus enjoyed much fortune. Unswerving in the Power he had, he held all the domains around. Heaven scanned the land below, its charge was laid upon him." @ ""Classic of Poetry""
"The grandsons and sons of the Shang, Shang’s grandsons and sons, Their hosts were innumerable. But Di on high gave his command, And by Zhou they were subdued. By Zhou they were subdued; Heaven’s charge is not forever. The knights of Yin, big and little, Made libations and offerings at the capital; What they did was to make libations Dressed in skirted robe and close cap. O chosen servants of the king, May you never thus shame your ancestors!" @ ""Classic of Poetry""
"Feelings emerge in sounds.... The tones of a well-managed age are at rest and happy: its government is balanced. The tones of an age of turmoil are bitter and full of anger: its government is perverse. The tones of a ruined state are filled with lament and brooding: its people are in difficulty." @ "Great Preface to "Classic of Poetry""
"May you never shame your ancestors, But rather tend their inward power, That for ever you may be linked to Heaven’s charge And bring to yourselves many blessings. Before Yin lost its army It was well linked to God above. In Yin you should see as in a mirror That Heaven’s high charge is hard to keep." @ ""Classic of Poetry""
"It is the means by which the world is influenced (feng) and by which the relations between husband and wife are made correct. Thus it is used in smaller communities, and it is used in larger domains. “Airs” (Feng) are “Influence” (feng); that is, teaching. By influence it stirs them; by teaching it transforms them. By means of poetry, the former kings managed the relations between husbands and wives, perfected the respect due to parents and superiors, gave depth to human relations, beautifully taught and transformed the people, and changed local customs." @ "Great Preface to "Classic of Poetry""
"The fishhawks sing gwan gwan on sandbars of the stream. Gentle maiden, pure and fair, fit pair for a prince. ... Wanting, sought her, had her not, waking, sleeping, thought of her, on and on he thought of her, he tossed from one side to another. ... Watercress grows here and there, right and left we pick it out. Gentle maiden, pure and fair, with bells and drums do her delight" @ ""Classic of Poetry""
